docs(readme): include getting started instructions (#20)
namehash/ensnode: README.md

> powered by ponder

## Getting started

> Run

Reviewer: Prefer we assume a clean OS install. Therefore we shouldn't assume node.js / npm / pnpm are installed yet. Please consider the following as a source of some inspiration: https://github.com/namehash/namekit?tab=readme-ov-file#local-development

Of course, we shouldn't copy that directly as it doesn't apply 100% here. But appreciate your suggestions :+1:

![CleanShot 2025-01-10 at 01 06 26](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b496f4fc-9e46-42c6-a32c-db5cd0b8ea42)

```
pnpm install
```
to get the NPM dependencies downloaded.

Then, initialize local environment configuration:
```
cp .env.local.example .env.local
```
and update:

- `ACTIVE_PLUGIN` — set any plugin name you’d like to active (`eth`, `base.eth`, or `linea.eth`)
- `RPC_URL_*` — optional, but you can use private ones to speed the syncing process up
- `DATABASE_SCHEMA` is arbitrary, with the limitations mentioned in the linked documentation

> - `DATABASE_URL` is your local postgres database connection string

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DATABASE_URL` is your postgres database connection string
```

Reviewer: Please also include docs for postgres being a prerequisite. I assume it is?

Please write these docs in a way where you strip your assumptions about the reader down aggressively. Assume they have no postgres server yet.

I'm not trying to suggest we include a bunch of detailed docs here on how to download, configure, and run postgres. Instead, let's please explicitly recognize and document that these are prerequistes and steps that need to be performed. Here we might do things such as link to official Postgres Docs for setting that up. We might also link to a cloud-hosted Postgres provider such as https://supabase.com/ for people who prefer the easiest possible route.

Also, as I understand Ponder also has a mode that doesn't use postgres at all but instead uses some other database library? Is this something we should talk about here too?

Appreciate your advice.

Author: Here's where I would suggest Docker as a prerequisite and to create a postgres database container with:
```
docker run -d \  --name my_pgdb \
  -e POSTGRES_USER=dbuser \
  -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=abcd1234 \
  -e POSTGRES_DB=my_database \
  -v pgdata:/var/lib/postgresql/data \
  -p 5432:5432 \
  postgres
```

This command is fully-compatible with the `.env.local.example` file, I use it myself to host the DB server.

Reviewer: @tk-o Thanks for your feedback on this!

I'm struggling a bit with how to proceed. Perhaps you can create a new GitHub issue where we can move discussion of this goal into a separate future PR?

On one hand, want to ensure we have clear documentation for how postgres is required and make it easy for people to run their own instance.

On the other hand, what about people who want to run their own postgres instance (which might already exist -- separate from our indexer) and not run docker?

Appreciate your advice :+1:

Author: We could, for now, say that the postgres instance is a prerequisite. It's the same as having git installed — the user decides how to make it available (is docker, or maybe supabase, or a local binary).

> Once the `.env.local` is setup, you can run the indexer in either way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once your `.env.local` is configured, launch the indexer by running:
```

Reviewer: This remains an open suggestion.

> - `pnpm ponder dev`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pnpm ponder dev` for development mode.
```

> - `pnpm ponder start`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pnpm ponder start` for production mode.
```

To learn more about those commands, go to https://ponder.sh/docs/api-reference/ponder-cli#dev

> 

Reviewer: We should extend the getting started narrative to include steps for actually getting value out of the indexer. For example, something in the general direction of the following: https://ponder.sh/docs/getting-started/new-project#query-the-graphql-api

Please consider and suggest other ideas / steps we should consider describing here.

Again, please forget all the things you already know and do your best to step into the shoes of someone who's never even heard of an indexer before. The documentation here is for them.

Author: I thought the top value we wanted to deliver was about the GQL interface that mimics the ENS subgraph interface.

Otherwise, yes, we can even record a demo video showing all queries that are available.

Reviewer: @tk-o Yes. Could you please add ideas to the readme here, including:

1. How to query the GraphQL API (what route to send requests to, relative to the hostname of the reader's indexer) / any other relevant details on this. Perhaps also link related documentation in Ponder docs.
2. That the GraphQL API of our indexer mimics the ENS Subgraph interface to make transitioning from the ENS Subgraph easy.
3. Instructions for how to configure ensjs to make use of our indexer. Please see points 2 and 3 shared in this Slack message: https://namehash.slack.com/archives/C086Z6FNBHN/p1735335513211229

Suggest we not record any video demos for now.

Reviewer: Resolving this to help close this PR faster. Transferred this idea into https://github.com/namehash/ensnode/issues/42

> powered by ponder

## Quick start

### Prerequisites

- [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/)
  - It's recommended you install Node.js through [nvm](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) (see link for installation instructions).
  - To ensure you're running the expected version of Node.js run `nvm install` in the root of the repository (after you clone it).
  - Node.js will automatically install `corepack`. You should also ensure Corepack is enabled by running `corepack enable`.
- [pnpm](https://pnpm.io/)
  - Run `npm install -g pnpm` or see [other installation options](https://pnpm.io/installation).
  - To ensure you're running the expected version of pnpm run `corepack use pnpm` in the root of the repository (after you clone it).

> 

Reviewer: Perhaps we should add Postgres to the list of dependencies here? Please see the separate discussion thread below regarding how we handle the database question.

Reviewer: Resolving this to help close this PR faster. Transferred this idea into https://github.com/namehash/ensnode/issues/42

> ### Running indexer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Run the indexer
```

Clone this repository:
```
git clone git@github.com:namehash/ens-multichain-indexer.git
cd ens-multichain-indexer
```

> Have NPM dependencies downloaded:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Install dependencies:
```

```
pnpm install
```

> Initialize local environment configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure for your local environment:
```

```
cp .env.local.example .env.local
```

> and update:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then review the docs inside your .env.local file for configuration instructions.
```

Then, can you please remove all docs in this readme file about specific environment variables? Please move / merge all of those ideas directly into comments in the .env.local.example file.

> - `ACTIVE_PLUGIN` — set any plugin name you’d like to active (`eth`, `base.eth`, or `linea.eth`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ACTIVE_PLUGIN` — set the plugin name you’d like to activate (`eth`, `base.eth`, or `linea.eth`). The activated plugin determines which contracts and chains are indexed. Currently only a single plugin can be activated at a time. Soon we will remove this constraint to allow multiple plugins to be activated concurrently.
```
